notes/bioinformatics_tools_not_curated.md, before:

# Search tools

NCBI's Edirect toolkit to help search and extract data from their databases. There's an online [book](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK179288/) and [cookbook](https://ncbi-hackathons.github.io/EDirectCookbook/)

NCBI's SRAtoolkit

LexicMap - if you want to search millions of prokaryotic genomes at once, blast can be too slow. This is a quicker alternative.

## LOGAN search (SRA) 

LOGAN search to search SRA database using kmers

LOGAN web search interface is [here](https://logan-search.org/) - click 'query the planet' to do a search.

Sept 2025 notes on LOGAN
- query must be a single sequence, up to 1kb
- makes sense to limit the search otherwise results can be overwhelming
- the dashboard can show plots, albeit slowly
- can download results - either just a `data.tsv`, which contains scores for the matching SRA datasets and their metadata, or as a small zip file, which contains the same tsv file (named after the sequence) as well as a json file that lets you view hits locally

The downloaded README.md file says I can view a local version of the dashboard. Isn't working for me right now (home laptop) - I get errors about not being able to establish a secure connection. I could try when I don't have the VPN running - that might or might not work. On a mac (did this on my home laptop)
```
pip install kmviz
python -m kmviz app start session --no-seq-tab
```
Then tried connecting using a web browser to https://localhost:8050/dashboard 



# Multiple sequence alignments

## Making multiple sequence alignments

Fast Statistical Alignment
http://www.ploscompbiol.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pcbi.1000392
http://orangutan.math.berkeley.edu/fsa/, http://fsa.sourceforge.net/.

## Alignment masking

There are block-filter methods (remove entire columns from alignment) and segment-filter methods (remove part of whole of individual sequences).  I think also some hybrid methods?

MACSE has some sort of mode where it trims non-homologous fragments

Figure 1 of [the OrthoMam paper](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/D1/D529/7318103) shows the pipeline they used for alignments - they do a lot of filtering. 15,868 alignments from 190 mammalian genomes. Website isn't working well as of Oct 11 2024.

### Filter out entire sequences
- [PhylteR](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/40/11/msad234/7330000)

### Block methods:

- trimal - can trim gappy positions out of an alignment (nucleotide or protein). Example usage:
```
trimal -in myAln.fa -out myAln.trimal.fa -automated1 -htmlout myAln.trimal.html -colnumbering > myAln.trimal.retainedColumns.txt
```
Some papers say trimal isn't as good as GUIDANCE and/or ZORRO

Also:
- BMGE
- GBLOCKs - some papers say this isn't as good as GUIDANCE

### Segment methods
- [HMMCleaner](https://bmcecolevol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12862-019-1350-2)

### Other methods - maybe segment, maybe hybrid, or I just haven't looked

I think 
- `SWAMP`
- GUIDANCE (I used this in the kinetochore pipeline)
- ZORRO (Wu, Chatterji, Eisen, PLoS ONE, 2012)
- PREQUAL
- MACSEv2 "trimNonHomologousFragments" module

## Public alignment/orthology datasets

Ensembl and the BioMart interface

OrthoDB (there is an R package for OrthoDB). Provides estimate of evolutionary rates

[OrthoMaM](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/D1/D529/7318103) - 15,868 alignments from 190 mammalian genomes, should be 1-to-1 othologs. Nice alignment filtering: should be high quality? Should be in-frame.

Zoonomia project: >240 mammals analyzed. Precomputed genome-wide mammalian conservation scores, and codon alignments are here https://zoonomiaproject.org/the-data/ 

[CESAR tool](https://github.com/hillerlab/CESAR2.0) somehow extracts gene/exon alignments from whole genome multiple alignments. 

12-species alignments (10 mammals+chicken+tortoise) (nucleotide and amino acid) for 7445 genes from Shuler & Hagai paper 2022 in teh associated [github repo](https://github.com/galshuler/Evolution_of_host-virus_protein_protein_interactions). I downloaded and unpacked in `~/FH_fast_storage/paml_screen/Adrian_Pelin_vaccinia/references/2022-Shuler/git_repo/Evolution_of_host-virus_protein_protein_interactions`. See notes in `~/FH_fast_storage/paml_screen/Adrian_Pelin_vaccinia/Adrian_Pelin_vaccinia_NOTES.md`

120-mammal alignment described in this 2019 paper by [Hecker and Hiller](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31899510/) and available [in a genome browser](https://genome-public.pks.mpg.de/) and [for download](https://bds.mpi-cbg.de/hillerlab/120MammalAlignment/).

144-vertebrate whole genome alignment described in this 2017 paper by [Sharma and Hiller](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/14/8369/3875570) - data are available [here](https://bds.mpi-cbg.de/hillerlab/144VertebrateAlignment_CESAR/). The CESAR tool takes whole genome alignments and human exon coordinates, and uses that to extract orthologous exons.

TreeFam

[Genomicus browser v93](https://www.genomicus.bio.ens.psl.eu/genomicus-93.01/cgi-bin/search.pl) - uses orthology data from ensembl. Older versions like v93 represent paralogs better. 

COG: NCBI's database of clusters of orthologous genes.  [COG website](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/cog) allows you to send selected protein sequences from COG to COBALT alignment generator, to tweak alignment parameters if needed, and then to download an alignment.

PhyloPat
Seems to be out-of-date and unmaintained
June 2014: http://www.cmbi.ru.nl/cdd/phylopat/52/
Based on Ensembl 52 (quite old:  Ensembl now up to v75)

[xProtCAS](https://slim.icr.ac.uk/projects/xprotcas) server has precalculated scores for many protein structures (or perhaps just structural modules within many protein structures). Can also view/download the underlying alignments

[Consurf-db](https://consurfdb.tau.ac.il/overview.php) (that data also used/displayed in Proteopedia database)
- per-residue rates for proteins that have structure in PDB. 
- Uses up to 300 homologues, found in UniRef90, with some seq identity/coverage filters 
- evolutionary rates for each site calculated based on tree+alignment using Rate4Site algorithm
- Proteopedia warns that the homolog gathering is automated, and may include proteins of similar ancestry but divergent function. To truly understand which residues are important for a particular function, you'd want to filter input protein alignment based on functional knowledge

[orthogene](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/orthogene/inst/doc/orthogene.html) R package

eggNOG [database](http://eggnog6.embl.de) and [publication](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36399505/)

phyloP tracks from UCSC genome browser

[OMA orthology database](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29106550/) 

INPARANOID (?) maybe old


# Phylogenies

## Making trees

IQ-Tree - I see this used in several large-scale studies

[Treebest](http://treesoft.sourceforge.net/treebest.shtml) - used in Ensembl pipeline. Combines multiple tree types (nucleotide, protein, dN, dS, species tree), tries to reduce number of mismatches to species tree, infers duplication, deletion, etc.

SATe - simultaneous alignment and tree estimation - Liu, Raghavan, Nelesen, Linder and Warnow. Science, 2009


PLATO for detecting variation in evolutionary rates along alignment

## Analyzing trees

NOTUNG for tree reconciliation

CAFE for tree reconciliation (David Liberles says may be too simplistic)

David Liberles: expectation maximization for missing data

OrthoMCL for clustering genes/orthologs

## Getting species trees

[TimeTree](http://timetree.org)

[phyloT](https://phylot.biobyte.de) for getting accepted species trees

NCBI taxonomy - taxonomic classifications, not actual trees

[Lifemap](https://lifemap.cnrs.fr/tree?efficiency-mode=false&tool=search) - I think this uses NCBI taxonomic classifications, not actual teres,  [Lifemap](http://lifemap.univ-lyon1.fr/) might also be able to display the open tree of life



[Open Tree of Life](https://tree.opentreeoflife.org/opentree/argus/opentree9.1@ott93302) Can download a tree file from from https://tree.opentreeoflife.org/about/synthesis-release/v15.1



# Molecular evolution

## PhyloSim

PhyloSim (http://bit.ly/o09JXW) is an extensible and feature-rich framework for the Monte Carlo simulation of sequence evolution. Can use many different models (nucleotide, codon, amino acid, indels).

PhyloSim is implemented as an R package and it is available from CRAN (http://bit.ly/n54VGg) and the GitHub repository (http://bit.ly/nFo9rf) which also contains many example scripts implementing simulations of varying complexity.


# Phylogenetic tree display/plotting

interactive Tree Of Life [iTOL](https://itol.embl.de) has some nice-looking plotting tools

[ggtree](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/ggtree/inst/doc/ggtree.html) for R

FigTree

Dendroscope

TreeViewer

Geneious

## Note on obscure node label/rerooting bug in some programs 

[FigTree MAY have a bug](https://github.com/rambaut/figtree/issues/10 https://github.com/YuLab-SMU/treeio/issues/120) and may move node labels around when re-rooting.  

I noticed something similar in R, comparing old/new versions of `treeio`

# Transposons

TEtools - [paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27924026) and [repo](https://github.com/l-modolo/TEtools)

TEanalysis

RepEnrich2

Molly Hammell (CSHL) may have some tools available, but I see nothing online as of June 2014

Ting Wang may have some tools available, but nothing obvious from his webpage as of June 2014. I think there are some publications I whould look at instead. http://wang.wustl.edu/software

Tedna: a transposable element de novo assembler http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24894500?dopt=Abstract

RepeatModeler/RECON: de-novo repeat identification, classification and library building software suite. www.repeatmasker.org/RepeatModeler.html

Annotating repeats in a novel species:  EDTA tool, 2019
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31843001?dopt=Abstract

TypeTE - Genotyping known polymorphic TE insertion loci:  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32067044?dopt=Abstract

xTea (x-Transposable element analyzer) Peter Park lab 2021 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34158502/

TEHub resources Travis Wheeler https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34154643/


# User-friendly online toolsets

Galaxy
- Main public instance
- Hutch instance
- various other instances

EDGE - seems to be mostly for bacterial / metagenomics analyses?

# Deep sequencing

GC normalization: John Huddleston advised using mrFAST or mrsFAST for read mapping and then mrcanavar for GC normalization and copy number estimation. But that was a while ago (<2017?)

## RNA-seq
Ching-Ho likes HISAT2 (new version of tophat) for RNA-seq, partly because it has fewer options than STAR, but he also thinks STAR might do better with multi-mapping genes.  HISAT2 may be able to directly take SRA accessions and map without downloading reads.

Ching-Ho also notes that some RNA-seq datasets have high rRNA contamination. This could be affecting my RPKMs quite a lot.

## Gene set enrichment analysis

e.g. GO analysis (gene ontology)

The [ShinyGO tool](https://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/) seems nice (and can handle FlyBase gene IDs)

NCBI/DAVID has a tool

# Datasets/resources

## Genome browsers

UCSC
for custom tracks, hubs, etc, we can use a directory on fast that is accessible from beyond the Hutch firewall: /fh/fast/malik_h/pub/
see the notes file in that directory for more detail on how to host a hub (malik_pubDir_NOTES_JY.txt)

Ensembl

## Species-specific databases

Flybase, Wormbase, SGD

Virus Pathogen Resource (ViPR) is now part of [BV-BRC](https://www.bv-brc.org), the bacterial and viral bioinformatics resource center




## Methods for conservation / evolutionary rates

### Nucleotide

dN/dS type methods

genome-based methods (phyloP etc)

[SLR](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/research/goldman/software/slr/)

Selecton, 2007 - [publication](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17586822/) and [website](http://selecton.bioinfo.tau.ac.il). Website not responding on 10/11/2024. I don't see a way to download the algorithm. Looking at the paper, it looks like it uses various evolutionary models (e.g. codeml M7/M8 etc, or MEC, which takes protein models like JTT and converts them to codon models). Does some kind of hypothesis testing, chooses the best-fitting model.  Also uses a Bayesian method to estimate sitewise dN/dS - uses 8 discrete rate categories and does something with posteriors to get the estimate.

### Protein

[Evorator](https://evorator.tau.ac.il) - website not responding on 10/4/24

[Rate4Site](https://www.tau.ac.il/~itaymay/cp/rate4site.html) (ref [Pupko et al, 2002](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12169533/)) - given a multiple sequence alignment, it can generate a tree (or you can provide one) and it calculates the relative evolutionary rate at each site.

## Transcriptomics

Multispecies developmental timecourse [browser](https://apps.kaessmannlab.org/evodevoapp/).
- human, rhesus macaque, mouse, rat, rabbit, opossum and chicken
- seven organs (cerebrum, cerebellum, heart, kidney, liver, ovary and testis)
- developmental time points from early organogenesis to adulthood

## Ribosomal profiling (ribo-seq)

https://github.com/nzhang89/RiboSeeker

This paper PROBABLY has some sort of accessible database associated [High-quality peptide evidence for annotating non-canonical open reading frames as human proteins](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.09.612016v1)

## Single cell data

Brotman Baty's [Descartes](https://descartes.brotmanbaty.org) - gateway to single cell atlas for several species

[This paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08411-y) from Aviv Regev's lab shodescribes a tool called `SCimilarity` that allows you to take a single cell profile query and search all known existing single cell data to find datasets that contain cells with matching profiles.

[This 2024 perspective paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08338-4) from Aviv Regev and colleagues might be a good starting point for learning about uses of single cell data


## Variation 

Human: 1000 genomes [selection browser](http://hsb.upf.edu/)

Drosophila: [popfly](http://popfly.uab.cat/) (has data to allow M-K tests)


# Variation

SHAPEIT for phasing haplotypes

## Databases of variation

### SNPs

[gnomAD](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org)

[European Variant Archive](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/eva/) - I don't think it shows allele frequencies

Ensembl browser also has table view that allows filtering. [Example](https://useast.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Variation_Gene/Table?g=ENSG00000171497;r=4:158709127-158723396)  (but in this example, it's missing a variant that's common according to gnomAD)

dbSNP

dbVar for copy number/structural variants

ClinVar for clinically significant variants

UCSC browser

[Human Genetic Variation Database](https://www.hgvd.genome.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp) (Kyoto)

1000 genomes https://www.internationalgenome.org

primate SNPs - [primateAI-3D](https://primateai3d.basespace.illumina.com/), Illumina. "The primateAI v1.0 data set contains primate variants from 811 samples of 236 primate species. The variants of these primate samples are first mapped to either its own genome assembly or the assembly of its close species (if the species genome assembly is not available) and then lifted-over to the GRCh38 reference." Published in [Science](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abn8197). It's mostly about trying to classify human variation as being pathogenic or not, but it also nicely catalogs primate variation in many species. 

### Structural variants

[Database of Genomic Variants](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/dgva/) - being phased out, transitioning to [European Variant Archive](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/eva/)

## Variant callers for long reads

Poster at Genome Informatics meeting said Clair3 works really well for nanopore bacterial sequencing

Sniffer for long read variant calling


# Protein sequence analysis

for structure, Antoine used UCSF Chimera (Pettersen, et al. 2004).

Uniprot has Alphafold predictions for many proteins. 

[Viro3D](https://viro3d.cvr.gla.ac.uk/), published [here](https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.1038/s44320-025-00147-9) hosts these predictions: "Using AlphaFold2-ColabFold and ESMFold, we predicted structures for >85,000 proteins from >4400 viruses" 

AFDB - alphaFold protein structure database

BFVD - database of predicted virus structures
https://academic.oup.com/nar/advance-article/doi/10.1093/nar/gkae1119/7906834#google_vignette

STRINGdb - database of known and predicted protein-protein interactions

[DHR](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39123049/) - dense homolog retrieval. Use cases: 
- distand homology
- when speed is important
Alignment-free. Mysterious encoding of protein seqs, allows comparison really fast. 

[`miniprot`](https://github.com/lh3/miniprot) spliced alignment of protein seq to genome seq (similar to genewise and exonerate). Not optimized for distant comparisons but it's doable.

## EMBL-EBI ProtVar database

[ProtVar(]https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ProtVar)

They've done functional predictions on every possible human missense variant.

Many different types of variant predictor.
- view on structure
- score likelihood of having detrimental effect, e.g. AlphaFold missense score, CADD score, stability change


## Proteomics

[π-HuB: the proteomic navigator of the human body](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08280-5)


# Electronic lab notebooks

LabArchive

# Not biology or coding

## Drawing programs

Some free alternatives to Adobe Illustrator:
- inkscape (Erick Matsen recommended)
- gimp
- paint.net
- AffinityDesigner Shirleen recommended, says it costs a $50 (one-time, not subscription) 



# Coding

## R
"escape excel" tool to get tab-delimited files ready to import into excel, without gene names getting mangled
https://github.com/pstew/escape_excel

## Python
Evolution python tools: http://etetoolkit.org/

## Markdown
To print a markdown file, use VScode. Right-click when the file is open to get a menu.

Commit message:

notes on Michael Hillier orthologs

notes/bioinformatics_tools_not_curated.md, after:

# Search tools

NCBI's Edirect toolkit to help search and extract data from their databases. There's an online [book](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK179288/) and [cookbook](https://ncbi-hackathons.github.io/EDirectCookbook/)

NCBI's SRAtoolkit

LexicMap - if you want to search millions of prokaryotic genomes at once, blast can be too slow. This is a quicker alternative.

## LOGAN search (SRA) 

LOGAN search to search SRA database using kmers

LOGAN web search interface is [here](https://logan-search.org/) - click 'query the planet' to do a search.

Sept 2025 notes on LOGAN
- query must be a single sequence, up to 1kb
- makes sense to limit the search otherwise results can be overwhelming
- the dashboard can show plots, albeit slowly
- can download results - either just a `data.tsv`, which contains scores for the matching SRA datasets and their metadata, or as a small zip file, which contains the same tsv file (named after the sequence) as well as a json file that lets you view hits locally

The downloaded README.md file says I can view a local version of the dashboard. Isn't working for me right now (home laptop) - I get errors about not being able to establish a secure connection. I could try when I don't have the VPN running - that might or might not work. On a mac (did this on my home laptop)
```
pip install kmviz
python -m kmviz app start session --no-seq-tab
```
Then tried connecting using a web browser to https://localhost:8050/dashboard 



# Multiple sequence alignments

## Making multiple sequence alignments

Fast Statistical Alignment
http://www.ploscompbiol.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pcbi.1000392
http://orangutan.math.berkeley.edu/fsa/, http://fsa.sourceforge.net/.

## Alignment masking

There are block-filter methods (remove entire columns from alignment) and segment-filter methods (remove part of whole of individual sequences).  I think also some hybrid methods?

MACSE has some sort of mode where it trims non-homologous fragments

Figure 1 of [the OrthoMam paper](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/D1/D529/7318103) shows the pipeline they used for alignments - they do a lot of filtering. 15,868 alignments from 190 mammalian genomes. Website isn't working well as of Oct 11 2024.

### Filter out entire sequences
- [PhylteR](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/40/11/msad234/7330000)

### Block methods:

- trimal - can trim gappy positions out of an alignment (nucleotide or protein). Example usage:
```
trimal -in myAln.fa -out myAln.trimal.fa -automated1 -htmlout myAln.trimal.html -colnumbering > myAln.trimal.retainedColumns.txt
```
Some papers say trimal isn't as good as GUIDANCE and/or ZORRO

Also:
- BMGE
- GBLOCKs - some papers say this isn't as good as GUIDANCE

### Segment methods
- [HMMCleaner](https://bmcecolevol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12862-019-1350-2)

### Other methods - maybe segment, maybe hybrid, or I just haven't looked

I think 
- `SWAMP`
- GUIDANCE (I used this in the kinetochore pipeline)
- ZORRO (Wu, Chatterji, Eisen, PLoS ONE, 2012)
- PREQUAL
- MACSEv2 "trimNonHomologousFragments" module

## Public alignment/orthology datasets

Ensembl and the BioMart interface

OrthoDB (there is an R package for OrthoDB). Provides estimate of evolutionary rates

[OrthoMaM](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/52/D1/D529/7318103) - 15,868 alignments from 190 mammalian genomes, should be 1-to-1 othologs. Nice alignment filtering: should be high quality? Should be in-frame.

Zoonomia project: >240 mammals analyzed. Precomputed genome-wide mammalian conservation scores, and codon alignments are here https://zoonomiaproject.org/the-data/ 

TOGA datasets (Michael Hillier). Would have been great for our bat question (Jyoti, R. affinis versus ferrumequinum question). Bunch of genome assemblies, bunch of genome annotations that might not be available at NCBI. Some orthology stuff (probably just versus human but need to explore more).
- [Downloads](https://genome.senckenberg.de/download/TOGA/)
- [Browser](https://genome.senckenberg.de/cgi-bin/hgGateway?hgsid=2657771_0pJ4sGR6C7nMoThhsPc8kvuHG9Kx)

[CESAR tool](https://github.com/hillerlab/CESAR2.0) somehow extracts gene/exon alignments from whole genome multiple alignments. 

12-species alignments (10 mammals+chicken+tortoise) (nucleotide and amino acid) for 7445 genes from Shuler & Hagai paper 2022 in teh associated [github repo](https://github.com/galshuler/Evolution_of_host-virus_protein_protein_interactions). I downloaded and unpacked in `~/FH_fast_storage/paml_screen/Adrian_Pelin_vaccinia/references/2022-Shuler/git_repo/Evolution_of_host-virus_protein_protein_interactions`. See notes in `~/FH_fast_storage/paml_screen/Adrian_Pelin_vaccinia/Adrian_Pelin_vaccinia_NOTES.md`

120-mammal alignment described in this 2019 paper by [Hecker and Hiller](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31899510/) and available [in a genome browser](https://genome-public.pks.mpg.de/) and [for download](https://bds.mpi-cbg.de/hillerlab/120MammalAlignment/).

144-vertebrate whole genome alignment described in this 2017 paper by [Sharma and Hiller](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/14/8369/3875570) - data are available [here](https://bds.mpi-cbg.de/hillerlab/144VertebrateAlignment_CESAR/). The CESAR tool takes whole genome alignments and human exon coordinates, and uses that to extract orthologous exons.

TreeFam

[Genomicus browser v93](https://www.genomicus.bio.ens.psl.eu/genomicus-93.01/cgi-bin/search.pl) - uses orthology data from ensembl. Older versions like v93 represent paralogs better. 

COG: NCBI's database of clusters of orthologous genes.  [COG website](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/cog) allows you to send selected protein sequences from COG to COBALT alignment generator, to tweak alignment parameters if needed, and then to download an alignment.

PhyloPat
Seems to be out-of-date and unmaintained
June 2014: http://www.cmbi.ru.nl/cdd/phylopat/52/
Based on Ensembl 52 (quite old:  Ensembl now up to v75)

[xProtCAS](https://slim.icr.ac.uk/projects/xprotcas) server has precalculated scores for many protein structures (or perhaps just structural modules within many protein structures). Can also view/download the underlying alignments

[Consurf-db](https://consurfdb.tau.ac.il/overview.php) (that data also used/displayed in Proteopedia database)
- per-residue rates for proteins that have structure in PDB. 
- Uses up to 300 homologues, found in UniRef90, with some seq identity/coverage filters 
- evolutionary rates for each site calculated based on tree+alignment using Rate4Site algorithm
- Proteopedia warns that the homolog gathering is automated, and may include proteins of similar ancestry but divergent function. To truly understand which residues are important for a particular function, you'd want to filter input protein alignment based on functional knowledge

[orthogene](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/orthogene/inst/doc/orthogene.html) R package

eggNOG [database](http://eggnog6.embl.de) and [publication](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36399505/)

phyloP tracks from UCSC genome browser

[OMA orthology database](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29106550/) 

INPARANOID (?) maybe old


# Phylogenies

## Making trees

IQ-Tree - I see this used in several large-scale studies

[Treebest](http://treesoft.sourceforge.net/treebest.shtml) - used in Ensembl pipeline. Combines multiple tree types (nucleotide, protein, dN, dS, species tree), tries to reduce number of mismatches to species tree, infers duplication, deletion, etc.

SATe - simultaneous alignment and tree estimation - Liu, Raghavan, Nelesen, Linder and Warnow. Science, 2009


PLATO for detecting variation in evolutionary rates along alignment

## Analyzing trees

NOTUNG for tree reconciliation

CAFE for tree reconciliation (David Liberles says may be too simplistic)

David Liberles: expectation maximization for missing data

OrthoMCL for clustering genes/orthologs

## Getting species trees

[TimeTree](http://timetree.org)

[phyloT](https://phylot.biobyte.de) for getting accepted species trees

NCBI taxonomy - taxonomic classifications, not actual trees

[Lifemap](https://lifemap.cnrs.fr/tree?efficiency-mode=false&tool=search) - I think this uses NCBI taxonomic classifications, not actual teres,  [Lifemap](http://lifemap.univ-lyon1.fr/) might also be able to display the open tree of life



[Open Tree of Life](https://tree.opentreeoflife.org/opentree/argus/opentree9.1@ott93302) Can download a tree file from from https://tree.opentreeoflife.org/about/synthesis-release/v15.1



# Molecular evolution

## PhyloSim

PhyloSim (http://bit.ly/o09JXW) is an extensible and feature-rich framework for the Monte Carlo simulation of sequence evolution. Can use many different models (nucleotide, codon, amino acid, indels).

PhyloSim is implemented as an R package and it is available from CRAN (http://bit.ly/n54VGg) and the GitHub repository (http://bit.ly/nFo9rf) which also contains many example scripts implementing simulations of varying complexity.


# Phylogenetic tree display/plotting

interactive Tree Of Life [iTOL](https://itol.embl.de) has some nice-looking plotting tools

[ggtree](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/ggtree/inst/doc/ggtree.html) for R

FigTree

Dendroscope

TreeViewer

Geneious

## Note on obscure node label/rerooting bug in some programs 

[FigTree MAY have a bug](https://github.com/rambaut/figtree/issues/10 https://github.com/YuLab-SMU/treeio/issues/120) and may move node labels around when re-rooting.  

I noticed something similar in R, comparing old/new versions of `treeio`

# Transposons

TEtools - [paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27924026) and [repo](https://github.com/l-modolo/TEtools)

TEanalysis

RepEnrich2

Molly Hammell (CSHL) may have some tools available, but I see nothing online as of June 2014

Ting Wang may have some tools available, but nothing obvious from his webpage as of June 2014. I think there are some publications I whould look at instead. http://wang.wustl.edu/software

Tedna: a transposable element de novo assembler http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24894500?dopt=Abstract

RepeatModeler/RECON: de-novo repeat identification, classification and library building software suite. www.repeatmasker.org/RepeatModeler.html

Annotating repeats in a novel species:  EDTA tool, 2019
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31843001?dopt=Abstract

TypeTE - Genotyping known polymorphic TE insertion loci:  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32067044?dopt=Abstract

xTea (x-Transposable element analyzer) Peter Park lab 2021 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34158502/

TEHub resources Travis Wheeler https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34154643/


# User-friendly online toolsets

Galaxy
- Main public instance
- Hutch instance
- various other instances

EDGE - seems to be mostly for bacterial / metagenomics analyses?

# Deep sequencing

GC normalization: John Huddleston advised using mrFAST or mrsFAST for read mapping and then mrcanavar for GC normalization and copy number estimation. But that was a while ago (<2017?)

## RNA-seq
Ching-Ho likes HISAT2 (new version of tophat) for RNA-seq, partly because it has fewer options than STAR, but he also thinks STAR might do better with multi-mapping genes.  HISAT2 may be able to directly take SRA accessions and map without downloading reads.

Ching-Ho also notes that some RNA-seq datasets have high rRNA contamination. This could be affecting my RPKMs quite a lot.

## Gene set enrichment analysis

e.g. GO analysis (gene ontology)

The [ShinyGO tool](https://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/) seems nice (and can handle FlyBase gene IDs)

NCBI/DAVID has a tool

# Datasets/resources

## Genome browsers

UCSC
for custom tracks, hubs, etc, we can use a directory on fast that is accessible from beyond the Hutch firewall: /fh/fast/malik_h/pub/
see the notes file in that directory for more detail on how to host a hub (malik_pubDir_NOTES_JY.txt)

Ensembl

## Species-specific databases

Flybase, Wormbase, SGD

Virus Pathogen Resource (ViPR) is now part of [BV-BRC](https://www.bv-brc.org), the bacterial and viral bioinformatics resource center




## Methods for conservation / evolutionary rates

### Nucleotide

dN/dS type methods

genome-based methods (phyloP etc)

[SLR](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/research/goldman/software/slr/)

Selecton, 2007 - [publication](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17586822/) and [website](http://selecton.bioinfo.tau.ac.il). Website not responding on 10/11/2024. I don't see a way to download the algorithm. Looking at the paper, it looks like it uses various evolutionary models (e.g. codeml M7/M8 etc, or MEC, which takes protein models like JTT and converts them to codon models). Does some kind of hypothesis testing, chooses the best-fitting model.  Also uses a Bayesian method to estimate sitewise dN/dS - uses 8 discrete rate categories and does something with posteriors to get the estimate.

### Protein

[Evorator](https://evorator.tau.ac.il) - website not responding on 10/4/24

[Rate4Site](https://www.tau.ac.il/~itaymay/cp/rate4site.html) (ref [Pupko et al, 2002](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12169533/)) - given a multiple sequence alignment, it can generate a tree (or you can provide one) and it calculates the relative evolutionary rate at each site.

## Transcriptomics

Multispecies developmental timecourse [browser](https://apps.kaessmannlab.org/evodevoapp/).
- human, rhesus macaque, mouse, rat, rabbit, opossum and chicken
- seven organs (cerebrum, cerebellum, heart, kidney, liver, ovary and testis)
- developmental time points from early organogenesis to adulthood

## Ribosomal profiling (ribo-seq)

https://github.com/nzhang89/RiboSeeker

This paper PROBABLY has some sort of accessible database associated [High-quality peptide evidence for annotating non-canonical open reading frames as human proteins](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.09.612016v1)

## Single cell data

Brotman Baty's [Descartes](https://descartes.brotmanbaty.org) - gateway to single cell atlas for several species

[This paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08411-y) from Aviv Regev's lab shodescribes a tool called `SCimilarity` that allows you to take a single cell profile query and search all known existing single cell data to find datasets that contain cells with matching profiles.

[This 2024 perspective paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08338-4) from Aviv Regev and colleagues might be a good starting point for learning about uses of single cell data


## Variation 

Human: 1000 genomes [selection browser](http://hsb.upf.edu/)

Drosophila: [popfly](http://popfly.uab.cat/) (has data to allow M-K tests)


# Variation

SHAPEIT for phasing haplotypes

## Databases of variation

### SNPs

[gnomAD](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org)

[European Variant Archive](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/eva/) - I don't think it shows allele frequencies

Ensembl browser also has table view that allows filtering. [Example](https://useast.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Variation_Gene/Table?g=ENSG00000171497;r=4:158709127-158723396)  (but in this example, it's missing a variant that's common according to gnomAD)

dbSNP

dbVar for copy number/structural variants

ClinVar for clinically significant variants

UCSC browser

[Human Genetic Variation Database](https://www.hgvd.genome.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp) (Kyoto)

1000 genomes https://www.internationalgenome.org

primate SNPs - [primateAI-3D](https://primateai3d.basespace.illumina.com/), Illumina. "The primateAI v1.0 data set contains primate variants from 811 samples of 236 primate species. The variants of these primate samples are first mapped to either its own genome assembly or the assembly of its close species (if the species genome assembly is not available) and then lifted-over to the GRCh38 reference." Published in [Science](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abn8197). It's mostly about trying to classify human variation as being pathogenic or not, but it also nicely catalogs primate variation in many species. 

### Structural variants

[Database of Genomic Variants](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/dgva/) - being phased out, transitioning to [European Variant Archive](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/eva/)

## Variant callers for long reads

Poster at Genome Informatics meeting said Clair3 works really well for nanopore bacterial sequencing

Sniffer for long read variant calling


# Protein sequence analysis

for structure, Antoine used UCSF Chimera (Pettersen, et al. 2004).

Uniprot has Alphafold predictions for many proteins. 

[Viro3D](https://viro3d.cvr.gla.ac.uk/), published [here](https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.1038/s44320-025-00147-9) hosts these predictions: "Using AlphaFold2-ColabFold and ESMFold, we predicted structures for >85,000 proteins from >4400 viruses" 

AFDB - alphaFold protein structure database

BFVD - database of predicted virus structures
https://academic.oup.com/nar/advance-article/doi/10.1093/nar/gkae1119/7906834#google_vignette

STRINGdb - database of known and predicted protein-protein interactions

[DHR](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39123049/) - dense homolog retrieval. Use cases: 
- distand homology
- when speed is important
Alignment-free. Mysterious encoding of protein seqs, allows comparison really fast. 

[`miniprot`](https://github.com/lh3/miniprot) spliced alignment of protein seq to genome seq (similar to genewise and exonerate). Not optimized for distant comparisons but it's doable.

## EMBL-EBI ProtVar database

[ProtVar(]https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ProtVar)

They've done functional predictions on every possible human missense variant.

Many different types of variant predictor.
- view on structure
- score likelihood of having detrimental effect, e.g. AlphaFold missense score, CADD score, stability change


## Proteomics

[π-HuB: the proteomic navigator of the human body](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08280-5)


# Electronic lab notebooks

LabArchive

# Not biology or coding

## Drawing programs

Some free alternatives to Adobe Illustrator:
- inkscape (Erick Matsen recommended)
- gimp
- paint.net
- AffinityDesigner Shirleen recommended, says it costs a $50 (one-time, not subscription) 



# Coding

## R
"escape excel" tool to get tab-delimited files ready to import into excel, without gene names getting mangled
https://github.com/pstew/escape_excel

## Python
Evolution python tools: http://etetoolkit.org/

## Markdown
To print a markdown file, use VScode. Right-click when the file is open to get a menu.
