notes/bioinformatics_other_resources.md, before:

# Learning R

A [four-part course](https://fredhutchio.github.io/r_intro/) put together by Kate Hertweck (former Hutch instructor). I think it's good.  Was updated in 2020 - not sure it will continue to be updated, but not many of the basics change.

Another, more in-depth [R course](https://stat545.com/r-basics.html).

RStudio's [on-demand webinars](http://rstudio.com/resources/webinars). 

RStudio's [cheatsheets](http://rstudio.com/resources/cheatsheets) on various aspects of R coding.  Helps you remember function names when you're coding.

# Using Hutch computer resources

Much more documentation on the Hutch resources [here](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/scicomputing/comp_index/).

# RNA-seq

Risa recommends this [RNA-seq tutorial](https://www.melbournebioinformatics.org.au/tutorials/tutorials/rna_seq_dge_basic/rna_seq_basic_tutorial/) from Melbourne Bioinformatics

# Other lists of resources

Hutch new (summer 2022) Data Science Lab ([DaSL](https://hutchdatascience.org)) has a list of training [resources](https://hutchdatascience.org/code_review/more_resources.html).

A [list of courses/resources](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/scicomputing/reference_training) suggested by other Hutch people: includes Hutch stuff as well as resources elsewhere on the internet (scroll to the bottom).

The Hutch [‘Coop’](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/bdsc.html) Bioinformatics & Data Science Cooperative. Used to have staff whose job was training, but not any more, sadly. Website still has some teaching materials here. 

Some useful classes/courses available through [fhcrc.io](http://www.fredhutch.io).

The Carpentries – coding and data science courses 
- https://carpentries.org/
- https://software-carpentry.org
- https://datacarpentry.org

Bioinformatics.ca resources
- https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCKbkfKk65PZyRCzUwXOJung  
- https://bioinformatics.ca 
- https://bioinformatics-ca.github.io 

Evolution and genomics [training materials](http://evomics.org/learning/) including tutorials on very specific things like PAML, also very general things like basic unix.

EBI's [training materials](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/on-demand)

[UW Summer Institutes](https://si.biostat.washington.edu) (Biostats department). Every year, July/August. Sign up for half-week modules on various topics (stats, genetics, genomics, big data, epidemiology and more)

[Data Camp](https://www.datacamp.com) - very broad range of programming/data analysis topics, not biology focussed.  Maybe subscription based? Not sure what you can get for free.

[Code Academy](https://www.codecademy.com) - very broad range of programming/data analysis topics, not biology focussed.  Maybe subscription based? Not sure what you can get for free.

[RuneStone Academy](https://runestone.academy) - open source textbooks. Don't know anything about the quality.

# More detailed R stuff

[regexpr](https://regexr.com) website - helps figure out regular expressions

Commit message:

added phylogenetics tutorial from Peter

notes/bioinformatics_other_resources.md, after:

# Learning R

A [four-part course](https://fredhutchio.github.io/r_intro/) put together by Kate Hertweck (former Hutch instructor). I think it's good.  Was updated in 2020 - not sure it will continue to be updated, but not many of the basics change.

Another, more in-depth [R course](https://stat545.com/r-basics.html).

RStudio's [on-demand webinars](http://rstudio.com/resources/webinars). 

RStudio's [cheatsheets](http://rstudio.com/resources/cheatsheets) on various aspects of R coding.  Helps you remember function names when you're coding.

# Using Hutch computer resources

Much more documentation on the Hutch resources [here](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/scicomputing/comp_index/).

# RNA-seq

Risa recommends this [RNA-seq tutorial](https://www.melbournebioinformatics.org.au/tutorials/tutorials/rna_seq_dge_basic/rna_seq_basic_tutorial/) from Melbourne Bioinformatics

# Other lists of resources

Hutch new (summer 2022) Data Science Lab ([DaSL](https://hutchdatascience.org)) has a list of training [resources](https://hutchdatascience.org/code_review/more_resources.html).

A [list of courses/resources](https://sciwiki.fredhutch.org/scicomputing/reference_training) suggested by other Hutch people: includes Hutch stuff as well as resources elsewhere on the internet (scroll to the bottom).

The Hutch [‘Coop’](https://centernet.fredhutch.org/cn/u/bdsc.html) Bioinformatics & Data Science Cooperative. Used to have staff whose job was training, but not any more, sadly. Website still has some teaching materials here. 

Some useful classes/courses available through [fhcrc.io](http://www.fredhutch.io).

The Carpentries – coding and data science courses 
- https://carpentries.org/
- https://software-carpentry.org
- https://datacarpentry.org

Bioinformatics.ca resources
- https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCKbkfKk65PZyRCzUwXOJung  
- https://bioinformatics.ca 
- https://bioinformatics-ca.github.io 

Evolution and genomics [training materials](http://evomics.org/learning/) including tutorials on very specific things like PAML, also very general things like basic unix.

EBI's [training materials](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/on-demand)

[UW Summer Institutes](https://si.biostat.washington.edu) (Biostats department). Every year, July/August. Sign up for half-week modules on various topics (stats, genetics, genomics, big data, epidemiology and more)

[Data Camp](https://www.datacamp.com) - very broad range of programming/data analysis topics, not biology focussed.  Maybe subscription based? Not sure what you can get for free.

[Code Academy](https://www.codecademy.com) - very broad range of programming/data analysis topics, not biology focussed.  Maybe subscription based? Not sure what you can get for free.

[RuneStone Academy](https://runestone.academy) - open source textbooks. Don't know anything about the quality.

Peter suggests this set of slides - [Introduction to Methods and Software for Phylogenomics](https://evomics.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Introduction-to-methods-and-software-for-phylogenomics.pdf)

# More detailed R stuff

[regexpr](https://regexr.com) website - helps figure out regular expressions
